.\" shlib - A shell library of reusable functions
.TH SHLIB_LOGGING 3 "February 2026" "shlib 0.3.6" "Shell Library"
.SH NAME
shlib_logging \-  Logging functions from the shlib library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B source
.I /path/to/shlib.sh
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shlib_logging
is a list of simple BASH printing functions for logging, including colorised and emoji variants.
All logging functions prefix messages with an ISO8601 local timestamp in brackets (e.g., [2024-01-01T12:00:00-05:00]).
Requires Bash version 3 or higher.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS Headers
.TP
.BI shlib::header " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout in bold (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::headern " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout in bold (with trailing newline).
.SS Simple Logging
.TP
.BI shlib::error " message"
Print
.I message
to stderr with ISO8601 timestamp and "error:" prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::errorn " message"
Print
.I message
to stderr with ISO8601 timestamp and "error:" prefix (with trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::warn " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "warning:" prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::warnn " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "warning:" prefix (with trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::info " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "info:" prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::infon " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "info:" prefix (with trailing newline).
.SS Colorized Logging
.TP
.BI shlib::cerror " message"
Print
.I message
to stderr with ISO8601 timestamp and red "error:" prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::cerrorn " message"
Print
.I message
to stderr with ISO8601 timestamp and red "error:" prefix (with trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::cwarn " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and yellow "warning:" prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::cwarnn " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and yellow "warning:" prefix (with trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::cinfo " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and blue "info:" prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::cinfon " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and blue "info:" prefix (with trailing newline).
.SS Emoji Logging
.TP
.BI shlib::eerror " message"
Print
.I message
to stderr with ISO8601 timestamp and "\[u274C] " prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::eerrorn " message"
Print
.I message
to stderr with ISO8601 timestamp and "\[u274C] " prefix (with trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::ewarn " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "\[u26A0]\[uFE0F] " prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::ewarnn " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "\[u26A0]\[uFE0F] " prefix (with trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::einfo " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "\[u2139]\[uFE0F] " prefix (without trailing newline).
.TP
.BI shlib::einfon " message"
Print
.I message
to stdout with ISO8601 timestamp and "\[u2139]\[uFE0F] " prefix (with trailing newline).
.SH VARIABLES
.TP
.B SHLIB_VERSION
The library version string (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_DIR
Absolute path to the directory containing shlib.sh (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_LOADED
Set to 1 when library is loaded. Used for double-source protection (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_ANSI_FG_CODES
Array of 16 foreground color codes used by colorized logging functions.
Index 1=Red, 3=Yellow, 4=Blue (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_ANSI_STYLE_CODES
Array of 9 text style codes. Index 0=Normal/Reset, 1=Bold (readonly).
.SH EXAMPLES
Basic usage in a script:
.PP
.RS
.nf
#!/usr/bin/env bash
source /path/to/shlib/shlib.sh

shlib::headern "Starting script..."

if shlib::command_exists git; then
    shlib::cinfon "git is available"
else
    shlib::cerrorn "git is required"
    exit 1
fi
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check the library version:
.PP
.RS
.nf
source /path/to/shlib/shlib.sh
echo "Using shlib version $(shlib::version)"
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I examples/logging.sh
Example script demonstrating logging functions.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Functions that check conditions return 0 on success and 1 on failure.
Logging functions always return 0.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shlib (7),
.SH AUTHORS
shlib was created by waltlenu.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See LICENSE file for details.
