.\" shlib - A shell library of reusable functions
.TH SHLIB_EXEC 3 "January 2026" "shlib 0.1.2" "Shell Library"
.SH NAME
shlib_exec \- Command execution functions from the shlib library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B source
.I /path/to/shlib.sh
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shlib_exec
provides functions for command execution.
Requires Bash version 3 or higher.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS Validation
.TP
.BI shlib::command_exists " command"
Check if
.I command
exists in PATH. Returns 0 if found, 1 otherwise.
.SH EXAMPLES
Check if a command exists:
.PP
.RS
.nf
#!/usr/bin/env bash
source /path/to/shlib/shlib.sh

# Check if a command exists
shlib::command_exists "commandname"
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B shlib::spinner
Returns the exit code of the executed command.
.SH NOTES
The spinner animation uses Unicode braille pattern characters.
Ensure your terminal supports Unicode for proper display.
.PP
The spinner hides the cursor during animation and restores it when complete.
.PP
Command output (stdout/stderr) is not captured by the spinner itself.
If you need to capture output, use command substitution around the spinner call.
.PP
The ANSI color reference functions use the global arrays
.BR SHLIB_ANSI_COLOR_NAMES ,
.BR SHLIB_ANSI_FG_CODES ,
.BR SHLIB_ANSI_BG_CODES ,
.BR SHLIB_ANSI_STYLE_CODES ,
and
.BR SHLIB_ANSI_STYLE_NAMES .
See
.BR shlib (7)
for details on these arrays.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shlib (7),
.BR shlib_logging (3)
.SH AUTHORS
shlib was created by waltlenu.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See LICENSE file for details.
