.\" shlib - A shell library of reusable functions
.TH SHLIB_STRINGS 3 "January 2026" "shlib 0.1.3" "Shell Library"
.SH NAME
shlib_strings \- String manipulation functions from the shlib library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B source
.I /path/to/shlib.sh
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shlib_strings
provides string manipulation functions for trimming, searching, padding, and case conversion.
Requires Bash version 3 or higher.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS Length and Emptiness
.TP
.BI shlib::str_len " string"
Output the length of
.IR string .
.TP
.BI shlib::str_is_empty " string"
Return 0 if
.I string
is empty or contains only whitespace, 1 otherwise.
.SS Case Conversion
.TP
.BI shlib::str_to_upper " string"
Convert
.I string
to uppercase.
.TP
.BI shlib::str_to_lower " string"
Convert
.I string
to lowercase.
.SS Searching
.TP
.BI shlib::str_contains " string substring"
Return 0 if
.I string
contains
.IR substring ,
1 otherwise.
.TP
.BI shlib::str_startswith " string prefix"
Return 0 if
.I string
starts with
.IR prefix ,
1 otherwise.
.TP
.BI shlib::str_endswith " string suffix"
Return 0 if
.I string
ends with
.IR suffix ,
1 otherwise.
.SS Padding
.TP
.BI shlib::str_padleft " string length" " [char]"
Pad
.I string
on the left to
.I length
using
.I char
(default: space).
.TP
.BI shlib::str_padright " string length" " [char]"
Pad
.I string
on the right to
.I length
using
.I char
(default: space).
.SS Splitting
.TP
.BI shlib::str_split " array_name string" " [separator]"
Split
.I string
into an array using
.I separator
(default: space). The result is stored in the array variable named by
.IR array_name .
If
.I separator
is empty, the string is split into individual characters.
.SS Trimming
.TP
.BI shlib::str_trim " string"
Remove leading and trailing whitespace from
.IR string .
.TP
.BI shlib::str_ltrim " string"
Remove leading whitespace from
.IR string .
.TP
.BI shlib::str_rtrim " string"
Remove trailing whitespace from
.IR string .
.SH EXAMPLES
Trim whitespace from user input:
.PP
.RS
.nf
#!/usr/bin/env bash
source /path/to/shlib/shlib.sh

input="  hello world  "
trimmed=$(shlib::str_trim "$input")
echo "[$trimmed]"  # [hello world]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Validate non-empty input:
.PP
.RS
.nf
read -r user_input
if shlib::str_is_empty "$user_input"; then
    shlib::errorn "Input cannot be empty"
    exit 1
fi
.fi
.RE
.PP
Case-insensitive comparison:
.PP
.RS
.nf
answer="YES"
if [[ $(shlib::str_to_lower "$answer") == "yes" ]]; then
    echo "Confirmed"
fi
.fi
.RE
.PP
Split a CSV line:
.PP
.RS
.nf
line="apple,banana,cherry"
shlib::str_split fruits "$line" ","
for fruit in "${fruits[@]}"; do
    echo "$fruit"
done
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I examples/strings.sh
Example script demonstrating string functions.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B shlib::str_is_empty
Returns 0 if string is empty or whitespace only, 1 otherwise.
.TP
.B shlib::str_contains
Returns 0 if substring found, 1 otherwise.
.TP
.B shlib::str_startswith
Returns 0 if prefix matches, 1 otherwise.
.TP
.B shlib::str_endswith
Returns 0 if suffix matches, 1 otherwise.
.TP
.B All other functions
Always return 0.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shlib (7),
.BR shlib_logging (3)
.SH AUTHORS
shlib was created by waltlenu.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See LICENSE file for details.
