.\" shlib - A shell library of reusable functions
.TH SHLIB_ARRAYS 3 "January 2026" "shlib 0.1.2" "Shell Library"
.SH NAME
shlib_arrays \- Array manipulation functions from the shlib library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B source
.I /path/to/shlib.sh
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shlib_arrays
provides functions for working with Bash arrays.
Requires Bash version 3 or higher.
.PP
.B Note:
Array functions take the array variable
.I name
as an argument (without the $ prefix), not the array contents.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS Length
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_len " array_name"
Output the number of elements in the array named
.IR array_name .
.SS Modification
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_append " array_name element..."
Append one or more elements to the array.
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_insert " array_name index element"
Insert
.I element
at
.I index
in the array. Existing elements are shifted to the right.
If
.I index
is beyond the array length, the element is appended.
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_pop " array_name"
Remove the last element from the array.
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_delete " array_name index"
Delete the element at
.I index
from the array. Remaining elements are re-indexed.
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_merge " dest_array source_array..."
Merge one or more source arrays into
.IR dest_array .
The destination array is overwritten with the combined elements from all source arrays in order.
.SS Ordering
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_sort " array_name"
Sort the array in place (lexicographic order).
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_reverse " array_name"
Reverse the array in place.
.SS Filtering
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_uniq " array_name"
Remove duplicate elements from the array in place, keeping the first occurrence of each element.
.SS Output
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_print " array_name" " [separator]"
Print array elements on one line joined by
.I separator
(default: space).
.TP
.BI shlib::arr_printn " array_name"
Print array elements one per line.
.SH EXAMPLES
Get the length of an array:
.PP
.RS
.nf
#!/usr/bin/env bash
source /path/to/shlib/shlib.sh

my_array=(apple banana cherry)
count=$(shlib::arr_len my_array)
echo "Array has $count elements"  # Array has 3 elements
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I examples/arrays.sh
Example script demonstrating array functions.
.SH EXIT STATUS
All functions return 0.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shlib (7),
.BR shlib_strings (3)
.SH AUTHORS
shlib was created by waltlenu.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See LICENSE file for details.
