.\" shlib - A shell library of reusable functions
.TH SHLIB 7 "February 2026" "shlib 0.3.6" "Shell Library"
.SH NAME
shlib \- A library of reusable Bash shell functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B source
.I /path/to/shlib.sh
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shlib
is a library of reusable Bash functions that can be sourced into shell scripts.
It provides common utilities for frequently needed operations.
.PP
The library enables strict mode
.RB ( "set \-euo pipefail" )
when sourced. It includes double-source protection to prevent loading multiple times.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.B shlib
requires Bash version 3 or higher. The library will fail to load with an error message
if sourced in an older version of Bash.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS Core
.TP
.B shlib::version
Print the library version to stdout.
.TP
.B shlib::list_functions
List all shlib functions, one per line, sorted alphabetically.
.TP
.B shlib::list_variables
List all shlib global variables (SHLIB_*), one per line, sorted alphabetically.
.SS System
.TP
.B shlib_sys(3)
System functions (command execution, operating system, processes, etc.)
.SS Data Types
.TP
.B shlib_arrays(3)
Array manipulation functions (append, insert, pop, delete, merge, sort, reverse, etc.)
.TP
.B shlib_kv(3)
Key-value (associative array) functions (set, get, delete, merge, find, etc.). Requires Bash 4+.
.TP
.B shlib_strings(3)
String manipulation functions (case conversion, searching, padding, splitting, trimming, etc.)
.SS Date and Time
.TP
.B shlib_dt(3)
Date and time functions (timestamps, formatting, parsing, arithmetic, duration, etc.)
.SS User Interface
.TP
.B shlib_logging(3)
Simple printing functions, colorised, with emoji
.TP
.B shlib_ui(3)
UI functions (spinner, etc.)
.SH VARIABLES
.TP
.B SHLIB_VERSION
The library version string (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_DIR
Absolute path to the directory containing shlib.sh (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_LOADED
Set to 1 when library is loaded. Used for double-source protection (readonly).
.SS ANSI Color Arrays
.TP
.B SHLIB_ANSI_COLOR_NAMES
Array of 16 standard color names: Black, Red, Green, Yellow, Blue, Magenta, Cyan, White,
and their bright variants (Bright Black, Bright Red, etc.). Index 0-7 are normal colors,
8-15 are bright colors (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_ANSI_FG_CODES
Array of 16 foreground color codes. Index 0-7 contain codes 30-37 (normal),
index 8-15 contain codes 90-97 (bright) (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_ANSI_BG_CODES
Array of 16 background color codes. Index 0-7 contain codes 40-47 (normal),
index 8-15 contain codes 100-107 (bright) (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_ANSI_STYLE_CODES
Array of 9 text style codes: 0 (Normal), 1 (Bold), 2 (Dim), 3 (Italic),
4 (Underline), 5 (Blink), 7 (Reverse), 8 (Hidden), 9 (Strikethrough) (readonly).
.TP
.B SHLIB_ANSI_STYLE_NAMES
Array of 9 text style names corresponding to SHLIB_ANSI_STYLE_CODES (readonly).
.SH EXAMPLES
Basic usage in a script:
.PP
.RS
.nf
#!/usr/bin/env bash
source /path/to/shlib/shlib.sh

shlib::headern "Starting script..."

if shlib::cmd_exists git; then
    shlib::cinfon "git is available"
else
    shlib::cerrorn "git is required"
    exit 1
fi
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check the library version:
.PP
.RS
.nf
source /path/to/shlib/shlib.sh
echo "Using shlib version $(shlib::version)"
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I shlib.sh
The library file to source.
.TP
.I tests/*.bats
Test files using the Bats testing framework.
.TP
.I examples/usage.sh
Main example script that runs all individual examples.
.TP
.I examples/*.sh
Example scripts for library functions split by section.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Functions that check conditions return 0 on success and 1 on failure.
Logging functions always return 0.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shlib_arrays (3),
.BR shlib_dt (3),
.BR shlib_kv (3),
.BR shlib_logging (3),
.BR shlib_strings (3),
.BR shlib_ui (3)
.SH AUTHORS
shlib was created by waltlenu.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See LICENSE file for details.
